
Alright I'm just gonna see if this works. This is the responses and submissions page. This is the grading queue. The grading queue allows our graders to see all assignments that have been submitted. It is sorted by oldest submissions first and all submissions of a certain kind are together. This allows grading one specific assignment at a time and seeing everyone who has an assignment for that turned in, which just makes grading much faster. This was based off of grading queues and other gradebook apps. It's just a really fast way for graders to get into one headspace for one assignment and then grade them all at once instead of changing focus between different assignments.

There are also starred assignments. This can be set up when the page is first made. Those always go to the top of the grading queue no matter what. These are things that are normally like a student is locked behind this assignment getting graded so it needs to be graded as soon as possible or else they won't be able to continue.

There's also if someone else is grading an assignment right now you'll see an icon to the left of the page name to let you know that they are there. If they are idling on that page it will be grayed out. When you click into it you'll see that icon up at the top as well. If there's someone else already here a banner will show up and it will warn you that someone else is grading and to be careful not because you can overwrite their changes and they can overwrite yours.

I decided to add this banner in this live grading notification because we were having issues where sometimes one of our guest graders, who are sort of like teacher assistants, would come in and they would perhaps open up an assignment and start grading it. They would then leave it open to come back later when they had time to finish it because they're usually doing these between classes and stuff. Sometimes another grader would come and work on that assignment. Usually grading one assignment doesn't take very long so the chances of two graders grading the exact same assignment at the same time are pretty low. It becomes much higher if someone is idling on that page and they have unsaved grade data just sitting there.

On this grading pop-up there's also a Generate All button. What this does is it looks for any item types on the page that can be graded by AI and it will send all of them to the GPT API along with the AI grading prompt. It will grade it based off of the prompt and send it all back in one and then you can see all of the AI suggestions at once. You can also toggle this one item type at a time.

When you use the AI grader you'll see a highlighted area underneath, or you'll see an area underneath the thing that you're grading. It will highlight with different colors in the original text and where the AI is responding so you can see exactly what part of the grade the AI came up with or what part of the thinking it's using and how it relates to specific parts of the text. It was done this way because we were having lots of issues, especially when AI was much newer, with it hallucinating. This was a really good way to have it check itself to make sure it's not hallucinating and also for the grader to quickly see at a glance if it's hallucinating. If you're seeing extra colors or missing colors, that means that the AI missed something or is adding something that isn't actually there. Just setting this up and telling the AI to basically source from the main, from the original text, what it's responding to, I found, was a really good way for it to reduce almost all hallucinations.

the Grading Queue can be filtered by a few different things. Probably the most useful one is this toggle up at the top that says "All Courses". The graders and course creators that work with Math Track in-house have access to all of the courses that are created here and any of those content creators can go in and make changes or grade for a course. However they can also have courses assigned to them specifically so that if they turn off the "All Courses" toggle they'll only see the courses assigned to them.

It's just a way to have a cleaner interface when you've worked out with another grader that you'll handle this course and they'll handle that one. If they're ever out of town or something or out of work that day, you can toggle that "All Courses" button on and then you'll be able to see that you'll be able to handle grading for other graders.

There's also this chip dropdown, which allows you to select which programs you want to grade for. MathTrak has several different programs and the times that they run during the year can be different. The Bachelors, for example, might have a heavy area before school starts up in August. We have to get all of their assignments graded before that new school year starts so we might focus on just Bachelors this week. This is an easy way to just see the Bachelor's assignments.

We have two versions of a gradebook:
The course view allows you to select a course and you can see all students that are enrolled in that course and their grades for that. This specific gradebook view is especially helpful for guest professors or guest teachers who are coming in and they only have one or two classes at a time anyway and they might have a pretty small number of students in that class. This is a good way for them to just see all 20 of their students in one place and see how they're progressing through the course and see what their grades are. They can grade from here.
The student gradebook allows you to view a specific student and you can see every course they're enrolled in and you can grade and see their progress from here. This gradebook view is very helpful for our Math Trek content creators and graders because it's not unusual for them to need to check in on a single student and see how they're progressing and see how they're doing. Sometimes a single student will do a whole bunch of work at once, like a week before the end of a course or something, and then they'll message the grader and tell them, "Hey I have a whole bunch of stuff that needs graded before next week." This is an easy way for the grader to come in and look at just that person's stuff.
For both of the gradebooks you're only able to see courses and students that are assigned to you or are enrolled in any of the courses that are assigned to you. By default our Math Trek content creators have access to all of the students and all of the courses.

It's not unusual for a student or a school to reach out to us and ask for an unofficial transcript. This is one of the ways that our grader can see that. Students themselves also have an unofficial transcript they can view on their dashboard but it's helpful to have this in a place where you can also see all of the grades for those courses in one place.

You can also toggle reading pages on or off. If you're on the page for at least three seconds, it counts as you've read that page because we still want to track progress through reading pages but they're not actually being graded on them. They take up a lot of visual space when that's turned on but sometimes it's helpful to check if students are jumping around the course and it's also good at a glance. Do we see lots of students skipping all of the reading and going straight to quizzes? That's sort of a suspicious behavior that should be looked into especially if they're acing all of the quizzes. Most of the time you can just keep that turned off and it makes the page smaller and easier to see. This also has a "my courses only" toggle.

We have something called milestones. This is a way to at a glance see progression through courses using essentially keystone assignments. Assignments can be locked behind other courses or assignments being finished. There are certain courses when they're completed it could mean that you've completed the rest of the program already. This is just a quick way to see if you've done that or not or if you've done really important things that have to be done before we can move you forward in the program.

there are a few different ways for a milestone to be triggered.

You have this information up at the top:
a title
a type
a program
the number of days to complete
These are mostly organization fields for the manager who is creating them. The trigger down at the bottom is how they actually set what the milestone is going to be. Pages, items, courses, they all have an ID. You can choose if it's a page completion, an item completion, or something else and then you can put the trigger ID in there. It will automatically look at the correct table and pull that trigger. The day to complete will show in relation to the students' program start date. Most of the students are not starting at the same time every year. Even if they're starting at very similar times, it's very infrequent that it's the exact same date. The days to complete is nice if you know that this introduction course needs to be done within 30 days of starting the program, for example. It will show you a customized due date depending on the person you're looking at.
Math Track managers have this Users navigation button over here and they have access to a whole bunch of tables. These are mostly just user demographics and they're sort of just split up this way because it's easier to look at all apprentices at once instead of trying to find them in one big table. There is one big table but it ends up having a lot of rows in it and it's just not very useful because the bachelors table versus the transition to teaching table, you probably want to have different default columns saved. Any column changes you make here are saved locally so a MathTrak content creator or MathTrak manager can come in here and have a very customized view of every single table, which is really useful. It's something that MathTrak staff specifically asked for because originally it was just the one big table. As we kept adding more and more programs and the use cases for them started to really branch away from one another, it just didn't make sense to have so many columns in one table turned on at the same time when you're editing.

The information that you see in the edit field or on the edit popover is also specific to the program or role that that person is enrolled in. This was done because there's just a lot of information and not all of the fields are relevant to all programs. Having all of them on here was really overwhelming for MathTrak content creators and graders managers to know what fields actually needed to be filled out and which ones didn't per program. By default this will only show you the fields that are relevant to that person's roles and programs. If you add a role or a program from this page it will update live and add the new fields that you need to fill out.

This pop-up has gone through a lot of changes as we've sort of evolved over the years. I found that the most smooth way to set this data up was to have a critical information section right at the top. It's the first thing you see and everything in this section needs to be filled out or that user won't be able to access their courses or their account. Everything else is not a minimum requirement just to get their accounts working. Organizing the information this way really cut down on issues with students not being able to access their accounts for multiple reasons, just because our managers weren't sure exactly which fields needed to be filled out.

There's also this qualifications page, which is pretty cool. We ask if you have a teaching license and if you do you can add a license from this list of Indiana teaching licenses that we have on file and then you can mark if it is active or not. You can put in exam history. Most of the teaching licenses require you to pass something called a Praxis exam so you can add your history for those. It's not common for people to pass them on the first time so having a history of that is really useful.

We have an area to put in education certificates. The education is also pretty cool because you can put in your major, your GPA, your transcript, and then there's this button here that managers have access to that says "Mark verified". Once they've looked over the transcript they can press that button and now everyone else who looks at this student's education history will know that this transcript has been verified from an official transcript and not just an unofficial transcript or from student word. In the past when we were a little bit more math focused and we were trying to help people get math teaching licenses specifically, having your major be in a math specialty would have you start with higher credits essentially or a higher level math course. It was helpful to have the major and the minors on file for that reason.
This Documents tab is also pretty cool. Depending on the program the student is enrolled in, there are different documents that they need to be able to quickly access. I found that one of the easiest ways for our managers or our teachers to upload that data was just from this screen. It's where they could put all of the files in one place. They can give them a name and then they can put them into a group and they can create new groups on the fly.

What that does is when that student goes to their documents page, they'll have these different groupings of documents and they can download or view them right from here. That's really useful because we were getting a lot of requests for a plan of study or proof of enrollment that these students were needing to show their administration. Being able to upload them here when they're ready so that we can just tell them to check in on their documents if there's ever a document they're needing instead of having to message us and sort of overload our teachers with requests like that. This really reduced the amount of file requests that our teachers were receiving.

this workflow tab is only available to Math Track managers and this is where all of the non-user management stuff comes in. There's an activity report, which is really just a way to see exactly what path every user has ever taken. This is a really good way to check if students are actually interacting with the site like they say they are. It wasn't uncommon for us to get complaints from students saying, "Oh I didn't work on any of my assignments because the app wasn't working" but we can get on here and see that they looked at several pages on the app so it clearly was working. It's sort of cut down on the amount of fake investigations that I have to look into because a student is lying about how much work they've been doing.

It's also really helpful if there's a bug or a glitch or something. I can come in and see the steps, the path routing that they took to get to that bug. When a bug report is made, it will already copy the path, the page that you're at, which is helpful. Sometimes students might navigate away and then report a bug or they might report a bug through our website or email instead of through the in-app report. This is just another way for us to see where something likely happened.

This is also a great way for us to export data to summarize how many days someone has been active. Previously we had an actual attendance table and this was back when we were working with K-12 students. This is what it looks like. It's not in use anymore because we just don't need this sort of detail anymore. We don't have to do that anymore. We can just use the activity log to automatically pull that data to just see how many days someone was active because that's all we really care about now.

The attendance log, though, was pretty cool when it was in use. It was school-specific so you could assign holiday schedules and start and end dates for semesters to schools and then the attendance book would show that. It would show you, "There's no school today. This is a holiday." There was also a way to mark someone absent or tardy. Our teachers really liked using this because they said it was really intuitive and it was just faster and more pleasant to use than the attendance books that are in most SISs. However most SISs don't allow you to import data like this and there's no way to connect to them to send the data automatically. Almost every school we've worked with required the teachers to use their attendance book. Even though this is really cool and everyone liked it, it ended up not being as useful as we would have liked.
This is the departments page. This is essentially a grouping organization system where you can create a department, which has a name, and then you can add roles and programs to it. You can choose if those roles or programs will be auto-enrolled into every course that belongs to that department. Our transition to teaching program and our professional development programs: we want every student with that role to be in every course assigned to that department. Every transition to teaching student will take all the transition to teaching courses.

Sometimes we have multiple programs that might be in some of the same courses. A department could be something like math track basics and you could put transition to teaching, bachelor's, professional development, master teacher, all in there. They will all be auto-enrolled into these standard generic math track courses. You can have specific departments for those roles where they're either auto-enrolled or not auto-enrolled for the courses that are actually specific for that program.

This was really helpful because this was one of the things that was a manual thing for a long time because of the way that the backend was set up, with the roles and the programs sort of being the same thing but them having access to different things. Having the developer me had to go in and add new programs and rules whenever we got one of those. This was one way to add a little bit of customization in without having to completely redo how the backend works. This allows our Math Track managers and content creators to have a little bit more control over how courses are, how students get enrolled in courses.

It also allows you to change color. As you can see, the Apprentice Mentor or the Apprenticeship and Cadet Teaching are all this brown color and that's because they're all very similar programs with only very slight differences. Our course content creators wanted to be able to quickly visually group those courses together when working on them. These colors are pretty cool, the way that they work. You can choose any hex color you want and it will calculate the contrast color and a darker version of the color for you using the new accessibility color standard.

The original one was a really basic formula and it was like, here's a contrast of 2.2 to 1 or whatever, but it's not very accurate because that's not how humans see colors. It's really obvious when you're looking at something and it's like white on orange and it's like, yeah, this is great, but anyone with eyeballs can see the contrast is not good there even though it says it is. It looks much better with black, but it will tell you that the contrast isn't enough for accessibility standards. The only reason that is true is because the formula is not good.

There's a new color formula that is really cool and it's much more complicated but it is actually based on how human eyes perceive color and light. This takes that new standard into account and calculates the contrast colors and it will warn you if you choose a color that is just not a good color and there's not really a good contrast color to have that meets accessibility standards. This is pretty cool. I kept having our managers asking for small tweaks to colors, like can you make this darker? There was a lot of well not really because then the contrast isn't right. They'd be like, can we have, I want all these to be the same color, and it's like, okay well I have to go in and change that manually for you. That might take a day. This allows them to do it and it reduces the need for us to manually check for accessibility standards with color. It just sort of does it for you and it does it in a much better way than the original contrast checkers work.

Schools and districts: all of this data was pulled from the Indiana Department of Education. They have lists of private and public schools.

I wrote an import tool that you feed this the spreadsheet into and it will automatically create the new schools and districts. It will attach them or update them if they already exist, make changes. This information is also linked to HubSpot so our managers can come in and create a new school from here or from HubSpot and they'll sync together. Schools belong to a district so that when you're doing analytics you can look at the district level or the school level, which has been very helpful. The school and the district grouping is also helpful because it can be used as a cohort. Let's say you want everyone in this school district or everyone at this school to be able to do this thing, then we can use it as cohorts.

Our application system is pretty simple. It's very similar to the user editing dialogue with the education fields, the licensing fields, and the demographic fields. This page is a place to see all applications in one place because you can apply to multiple programs at MathTrak. It's not uncommon for someone to maybe start an application in the wrong program and then go to the other application and work on that. All of the applications share the same data so if they start an application for a bachelor's and then realize they're supposed to be doing one for professional development, they can start that and all of their data will still be there. They won't have to redo all the application stuff.

You can click on this to see sort of an overview of the person. On the application we also ask, depending on the program, a couple of extra questions when we're deciding whether or not this person should be enrolled. These are questions like:
Why do you want to be a teacher?
What strategies have you used?
This is also a place where we can ask them, "How comfortable are you with technology?" We want to know how much support this person is going to need. How much time will you have to work on this every week? If they put too low of a number, we will reach out and tell them, "This might not be the best program for you because you really need to have 5 hours available every week to work on this. You won't be able to get it done in time or it will take you much longer than normal." Some of our programs are priced on a 24-month graduation track and if it takes you longer than that, you start being charged by the month. We want to make sure people are putting enough time in every week to get it done before that happens.
we have a few simple tables for cohorts and semesters. These are really just data tables that managers can fill out and they show up in different parts of the site.

The announcements tool is pretty cool. We were having our professors or teachers or math track managers, content creators, whatever, needed a way to be able to tell an entire cohort something. For example the live tutoring session today has been pushed off, canceled, or rescheduled. They needed a way to be able to tell students that without having to ask me to do it every time. This is also something I use when I'm to warn users that the site is going to be kind of slow during maintenance or something at this time on this day.

You can create a title and a message and then you can choose a type: banner or dashboard. The banner will be at the top of the screen, a floating banner that people can close. It'll stay there until they close it. You could choose the color and it tells you when you should use them:
if something is an action you should take
if something is something good
if something is something bad
if this is just information
These colors are always used this way throughout the site. The idea is that students will subconsciously know that:
purple is always just information
something good is always green
I should really read anything that is yellow because that is something that I need to respond to or be careful of
really needs to pay attention to something that is red because that is going to negatively affect me somehow or it's really important and I will need to respond to it as soon as possible
You can choose the icon type that shows up. If you add a link, the X button (the close button) will be replaced with the link in the link text you create. The banner won't go away until they click on that so this is a way to ensure students are looking at the thing we're telling them to look at. The banner is sort of a way for us to force students to look at the thing we want them to look at because users really don't like navigating away from pages. It feels like heavy and like a lot of work and it kind of requires a shift in focus and a lot of people will just ignore it if they think they understand what's going on by the text itself. This is a way for us to say no you really actually need to read this and this banner is not going away until you actually click on this link and look at it.

The dashboard version just sits on their dashboard at the top. There's no way to close it but this is usually something that is time-limited. It won't be up there for very long or it will be up there for a couple of weeks. The banner won't be up there very long, that's like a one-day maybe up to a week kind of notification, whereas a dashboard change is something that could be much longer and it doesn't need to be interrupting the user's UI. This is something that's usually not as time-sensitive as a banner would be.

You can choose what roles see this. If you don't select any roles/programs, everyone will be able to see it, including people who are not logged in. This is especially useful if the app is going to be undergoing maintenance because we want people who aren't signed on to know that that's happening and that might be why the site is being a little bit slow. There are also cohorts so sometimes we only want this specific cohort of students from this program to see something and this is just another, let's say, finer step of organization for displaying you

the error log is something that I see and it just logs every time there is a fetch error. It's a good way for me to see exactly what the code was or what was in the body of the response. This is really just a debugging tool for myself. I can see who triggered that and that could be really useful because if I keep seeing the same name over and over and over again, I know that's something I need to look into and make sure that their account is set up correctly.

So we have something called evaluations and evaluations are essentially a way to grade or rate students or apprentices on how far into a competency they are. So this is the competency table, our math track staff can come in and add new competencies, and you know these are things like you're used to seeing in like a classroom like student can add two numbers together right they can be pretty precise like that or they can be kind of vague but yeah you can create these. You can create these competencies, you can give them codes, especially if you're doing like a k through 12 competency list they those have codes already so it's helpful to actually put the code in there because teachers will also know what those codes mean and then you can assign them to groups. These groups are how you customize what a mentor or an apprentice sees when they're on the evaluations page. So, like let's say they're not called mentors at a specific place they're called like gurus, and instead of apprentice they're called like learners. You can customize that. We see it's usually isn't a problem with like adults but it does confuse students when the language does not match what they're used to seeing or hearing so this is just one more way we can make sure that the experience is as seamless as possible and it feels like it's made for them and they're not just being kind of shoehorned into a system that was made for someone else because it was made for everybody. You can even add a logo like a school logo. The information blurb will show up for the mentor in the apprentice and it's sort of just an overview of like, what is this page and what is it used for? The competencies, have up to five point rating scale. Starting with like, have never even tried this, haven't looked at it. That's the equivalent of leaving it empty and not rated at all. You can change what that's called, you can change the description. And then you have up to three levels of learning or in progress. Then you have a final level which is like proficient or completed. You can turn any of these on or off. It's pretty common for us to only need zero through, it's very common for us to only need not started, in progress and proficient. The two extra middle ratings are not used as frequently. Then there are evaluations or sorry, then there are reflections. For most of our apprenticeship programs that we work with, there is some kind of reflection that is required. Sometimes it is like a once a week we want you to write about what you learned. Sometimes it is a daily reflection. You know every day you need to come in here and write what you learned. You can customize if there is a weekly or a daily reflection. You can put the prompt in and the instructions. There is a default instructions and prompt that can Be used. And then this weeks to run field here is, um, a way to limit how many of these a student can fill out. So the way that it works is if they're-- if it only runs for four weeks, um, the first week they fill one out, second week they fill one out, third one they fill it out, and then let's say they miss their fourth week, they come- back on the fifth week, they are still able to complete their fourth reflection. So it's like the weeks to run is a number of reflections essentially and not actually based on like a time limit. This is really helpful because usually like a mentorship or an apprenticeship is like 12 weeks. So we want 12 of these. And we want there to be 12, not including holidays, or summer break, or spring break. So the actual apprenticeship is 12 weeks, but from the date that they start and the date that they finish, it might be 14 weeks. So. This is a way to limit how many they can submit. For daily reflections, it will be like one per day up to this many weeks, and you know weekly reflection is up to this many weeks. There might be a better way to word this. But that's been really useful because we were having students sort of, like, we had students worried at first that, like, they missed the, like, I was out of school last week, and now I'm not going to have enough of these, or other students were like, oh, well, I was out, so that's one less thing I have to do, which neither of those are true, you still have to do the same amount.

One of the very first things I ever implemented into this system, within the first month, I think, was the ability to mock a user. If you're at the highest level of Math Track permissions, you can click on this mock button and you can see the app the exact same way as this user would.

It uses a really interesting permissions authentication system that I'm pretty proud of. It holds the ID of the person you're mocking in session storage. Then every fetch request, when giving the authorization token, if there is something in the session storage, it will append a question mark and then that person's ID. Whenever anything runs through an endpoint, when going through the authorization middleware, it will check the original token to make sure that you have access to whatever you're looking at. It then makes sure that if there is something in the session storage, it makes sure that that person has access to whatever you're looking at. You can see exactly which pages they can access.

There's no chance, even if a student, even if I forgot to remove this mock button for a guest teacher or something, if they were to mock a student, they wouldn't be able to see anything that their account couldn't see either. So

This has been probably the most useful tool for debugging out of anything that I have attempted because this is something that, like any manager, if a student's having problems, any manager can go in and mock them and see what's happening. This reduced so much of people coming to me and telling me something's wrong with this and this, and then I have to collect all this information to look into it. This allows them to just look themselves. A lot of the time it's really obvious. They might mock and see, "Oh, this person is obviously just not pressing the right button, or they maybe just didn't scroll down to see this." It took a lot off of my plate as the only developer when it came to responding to bug reports and questions. Now everyone else on the Math Track team can just mock someone and see what they're seeing, and then they can let me know if, "Yeah, actually, I think there is a bug happening," or they can just respond and say, "Hey, I think you just missed it. It's right here." They can take a screenshot and circle it. When you're mocking someone, there's no way for you to see the wrong thing because you are treated as if you are them logged in. Your original token is just there to make sure you're not seeing anything extra you shouldn't be able to see, which is pretty much impossible as a Math Track staff member anyway. When you're mocking someone, all of the interactions that actually change data for that user are disabled. You can't click on their notifications and clear them. You can view them, but it won't clear them. You can look at their evaluations and the reflections, but you can't submit a new one while mocking them as them. That uses a pretty cool middleware as well.

So if we look at our middleware here, we have a few different types of auth middleware. We have a basic one that everyone goes through and it basically just checks that you actually have an account and you should be able to view anything on the site at all. Then there's optional authentication. Sometimes there are pages that you don't need to be logged in to see them if you have the link.

For example we had a situation where we wanted mentors at a specific location to be able to come in and evaluate their apprentices without asking them to log in. This was because these were people who were not very tech savvy and they were not very open to the idea of learning how to log in and navigate around an app. They're probably working on a shared tablet or something at the workplace and it was just sort of an inconvenient way for them to work. I implemented the ability to generate a unique URL per apprentice and then that allows you to go to that page and act as the mentor for that apprentice without logging in.

When you visit the page optional require auth will run. If you're not logged in you will still pass the authorization but it will tell the front end to make a few changes, such as:
it will show you a big warning that you are looking at private student information and that it is against the law to look at this if it was not given to you specifically and that it is against the law to share this with anyone because it's a HIPAA violation
it asks you to type your name in so that we have
It asks you to type your name in so that we can still attach that to the evaluation rating history. It's important to have a history for anything like this because we need to be able to troubleshoot, like: did something go wrong, or did somebody come in here and accidentally press a button? It's also useful to be able to export changes over time, so this person on this date only got a one on the rating scale, but two months later they moved up a rating scale level. This makes it really helpful for keeping track of changes without having a really bulky UI where you're adding new entries. It just saves it automatically for you. If you change it on the same day, it just takes the last saved one, so you're not creating a whole bunch of extra entries.

This is, I think, a very elegant solution, because we had lots of questions about, like, well, can I go back and change this? If I go back and change it, how will I know how they've improved over time? This was a good solution to that, I think. Anyone can view that history button and see who graded it or who rated it, what date that was, and when it was changed from and changed to. They can type their name in if they are here without being authorized, and then every time they visit, so long as they type their name the same way, it will associate that same person every session. If you're not logged in and you don't have a profile picture, a robot avatar will be generated for you, and so long as you put the same name every time, it'll be the same robot avatar. This just makes it visually easier to track who's talking to who.

For the reflections we recently decided that we also wanted something called micro-narratives. The idea is that you make a reflection once a week at the end of the week, trying to remember everything you learned that week. It's just really easy to forget things. The micro-narratives are like you come in a few times a week and you write about that day specifically so that at the end of the week you can reference them when you're writing your reflection.

I wanted this to work in a flexible way because not every company that we work with cares about the micro-narratives and some want more, some might want less every week. The way it's set up is you can, in the prompt, include your micro-narrative instructions and then the micro-narratives just go straight into the comment box. It was important to our users, to the administrators, and to our MathTrack staff to be able to reply and have an ongoing conversation about the micro-narratives. Putting them into the comment system was a fast and easy way to do it and it was a pretty clean way to do it without having to add a whole new feature that might just kind of make the screen harder to look at and read.

To deal with, well, how do we let someone into the reflection? Do we know how many micro-narratives they did? In order to know that we have to set a number and then make sure they have the number. We're going to have to count them and somehow we're going to have to figure out what if they put all their micro-narratives in one comment versus three comments, right? There were a lot of hurdles to jump over with the idea of automatically sensing that the micro-narratives were finished before unlocking the daily reflection. I said, well why don't we just put a button that says "I can complete my micro-narratives"? It's just a visual stop when they go to do the daily reflection that reminds them, "Oh yeah I have to do micro-narratives." That button can be pushed for "Oh we don't have to do micro-narratives this week or we don't do them ever so I'll just press this button and go around it."

Since mentors or MathTrack staff are looking at these, there's no incentive to lie about not having done your micro-narratives or having done them because you know that someone will be looking and checking. Having a button on there that just is sort of there as a reminder to unlock the section has worked really well and it really is just a visual reminder.

The evaluation page itself, with the tracker and where you're actually rating the competencies, was designed mobile-first. The rest of the app I started off designing mobile-first and then found that almost no one was ever using it on mobile. I don't know if it's just something about this kind of work: people feel like it's serious enough that they should sit down at a computer and do it, which is pretty interesting psychologically. I found that there wasn't too much need to make sure to do mobile first on most of the app until we got to the evaluations. The mentors, specifically, are people who are volunteering to give up some of their time every week to look over this stuff and rate apprentices and give them feedback. We wanted it to be as easy as possible for them to do that because any sort of friction could turn them off from this role and it was really important that we don't turn them off from this role at all ever. It needs to be as easy as possible. That's part of the reason why they can use that link without logging in. We wanted to make sure that this needed to be mobile first because there's a very good chance they would be looking at it on their phone or from an iPad provided at work, especially if they're on a factory floor and they're walking around with an iPad doing checks. This just needed to work on a mobile device much more than the rest of the app needed to. The buttons needed to be big and easy to press and obvious that you were pressing them, especially when you have people who work in factories and they have very calloused hands. It's harder for them to press small buttons so we made the buttons big and obvious and made sure there were icons and not just colors to account for color blindness or displays with really bad color correction. This entire page was designed to be as easy as possible to just press some buttons and to know exactly what you are pressing these buttons for and what they are connected to.

The evaluation page itself, with the tracker and where you're actually rating the competencies, was designed mobile-first. The rest of the app I started off designing mobile-first and then found that almost no one was ever using it on mobile. I don't know if it's just something about this kind of work: people feel like it's serious enough that they should sit down at a computer and do it, which is pretty interesting psychologically. I found that there wasn't too much need to make sure to do mobile first on most of the app until we got to the evaluations. The mentors, specifically, are people who are volunteering to give up some of their time every week to look over this stuff and rate apprentices and give them feedback. We wanted it to be as easy as possible for them to do that because any sort of friction could turn them off from this role and it was really important that we don't turn them off from this role at all ever. It needs to be as easy as possible. That's part of the reason why they can use that link without logging in. We wanted to make sure that this needed to be mobile first because there's a very good chance they would be looking at it on their phone or from an iPad provided at work, especially if they're on a factory floor and they're walking around with an iPad doing checks. This just needed to work on a mobile device much more than the rest of the app needed to. The buttons needed to be big and easy to press and obvious that you were pressing them, especially when you have people who work in factories and they have very calloused hands. It's harder for them to press small buttons so we made the buttons big and obvious and made sure there were icons and not just colors to account for color blindness or displays with really bad color correction. This entire page was designed to be as easy as possible to just press some buttons and to know exactly what you are pressing these buttons for and what they are connected to.

I designed the structure of courses in a way to be really flexible. Math Track has our own structure when we organize courses but I wanted to make sure that other teachers could organize things in the way that they would like to.

One way to do that is we have to have this three-layer system with sections, lessons, and pages. If you don't want lessons, you can press this little eyeball and it will hide the lessons in the navigation bar and the numbers will start or continue on the next one that is available. You can also do this with sections.

This can be useful because you might want something at the start of a course that is like an introduction page but you don't want it to have a number, right? Let's say you want 1.01 to be the first interactable page and not like an introduction so you could put that at the top of your navigation and it won't have a number. This is also really common at the end to have a course feedback page and you don't really want that to be included in the course structure because it's not actually a page in the course if that makes sense.

Also some people organize, instead of having lessons, the sections are short enough to where it doesn't really make sense to put a lesson in there. We've had a few classes like that so lessons are not used at all. This has been a very good way to introduce some flexibility.

There are 10 item types and these are the building blocks. The most common one is this: it is a display item. What this is, is essentially a word editor. It works just like any in-app word editor does. You can copy and paste. You can embed pictures, videos, and audio into it. You can have links, quotes, code blocks, and there are interactable items, like a multiple-choice question. These can be dragged around to be reorganized.

I try to design and I try to know ahead of time what kinds of things will be issues or what kinds of edge cases are going to come up. I really enjoy trying to come up with those before they become a problem, especially because some of them are things people might not realize they can ask for. This is something I've noticed a lot in my career: I'll find out that a coworker has been doing something in a really weird way. It's like I could tell it's really inconvenient and takes them a long time. I'll make a suggestion like, "Hey what if I could add this thing in there? Would that help?" They're like, "Oh yeah I didn't know you could do that." I'm like, "Oh no you've been suffering for so long and I could have helped earlier."

Part of my design philosophy is to not add things or change things unless someone complains about them because you're creating a grocery list for yourself. There's also another side of that where it's sometimes people don't realize they could put something on a grocery list and they might just suffer with a broken cart on their wheel every time they go shopping. There's a balance there, deciding what kinds of edge cases should be handled and what kinds of things you should just wait and see if anyone actually cares about it.

In multiple choice for example, there's this forced checkboxes option. Sometimes you might want to have a sort of a trick question where many of these seem like they could be the answer and you want them to look like checkboxes but there's only one. The way it works by default is if you only mark a single correct answer it will show up as radio buttons. If you select more than one it will show up as checkboxes. This is a way to make sure it always looks like checkboxes.

There's this button to scramble the options so you can put them in whatever order you can scramble them and they will always show up in that scrambled version when students see it. This went through a couple of different iterations. Originally I had it so that every time you visited the page they would scramble randomly. This had a couple of problems:
The first being that it was really confusing to students when they would retake a quiz and the answers are in different spots now because a lot of them will see what they got right and then when they do the new assignment they'll just go and mark those really quick and then they'll focus on the ones that were wrong. If the checkboxes are moving around or the answers are moving around there's a good chance they pressed the wrong one because they don't realize it has changed order.
It also made it confusing if a student reached out and said the third option on this multiple choice question is confusing because the third option is different for you and for me probably.
Another iteration was: okay how about I scramble them when I save it and then they'll always see that scrambled version but it only gets scrambled once. That was a problem because sometimes you want the answers to be in a certain order, like if you're doing a rating scale using a multiple choice question and you want it to go zero, one, two, three. It's really weird if those get scrambled and you have no idea why that happened or no control over it.

Having a button here is really helpful. You put them all in, you press the Scramble Options button, and you get to see ahead of time exactly how they'll show up for everyone. You get to control if they get scrambled or not.

We also have fill in the blank questions. This one, I did this one really early in my development career. And I feel like the solution I came up with was pretty clever for not really knowing what I was doing. The way that this works is you type a sentence. And if you put three underscores in a row, it will treat that as a place for a word to go from your word bank. So you can type whatever you want. You put as many of these three underscore groupings. You can put them right next to each other so long as there's a space. And then there's a place for a word bank. These are all the questions you want to show or these are all the options you want to show up, separated by commas. Once you do that, you can go through and assign them to the blanks that you've created right here from the drop down. You'll see it exactly how students see it when they visit the page. And the word bank is scrambled. And that's not as big of an issue because they show up in a drop down, so yeah, I don't know. I thought it was a fun way to do it and I've never received any feedback about it being confusing or like hard to use so my assumption when I don't get bad feedback is that it's fine and I shouldn't mess with it so. Let's see, we also have a file type. This is just like an input field for someone to upload a file. You can limit it to just one or you can allow multiple uploads and then you can choose the file types that are allowed. And then we have written response you can control minimum and maximum word count and you can turn on allow file uploads. If you turn on file uploads, you can allow using the file as an alternative to the text. So they won't have to have any text to submit it so long as there's a file if you turn that on. This is really common if you tell them, if you like tell students like answer this question here or like link to a Google Doc where you've answered it right so You can also require a file whether or not file as alternative is turned on and then you have the allow multiple files and the allowed file types just like the file item itself. The written response is by default manually graded question because you know there's no way to put in a correct answer for a written response. But it being a manually rated item type using mostly text means that the AI grader can be used so I mentioned the AI grader earlier. Something that was important to note is the prompt that it gets sent is whatever the question was for the item. But sometimes it's not. It might be descriptive enough for a student to understand what you're asking but not enough for the AI to know how to grade it. So the AI grading prompt will use the question by default, but you can go in and add more or change it. The student won't see the grading prompt but this is what the AI will see when it's grading. And this is also really useful for reducing like poor grade outcomes. Sometimes it would come back with with really weird grades and it was because it wasn't you know it didn't have the context of the question or it was like being too lenient or it was being too strict so having this this prompt box here is really helpful. For manually graded item types like this you can change it to zero points and it will act as a like a completion grade instead so as long as you wrote something it is correct and then there's no need for the AI grading when you do that. Also, us starting as like a math education focused company we I built a latex like support into all of the title all the question titles I'm sorry all of the item titles and questions so that you can actually put math formulas in there. without it looking bad because we were our staff was trying to upload like photo like like little screenshots of formulas that they took and it was just kind of a big mess to have trying to support photos in the question field. And also like there's no guarantee that it'll be readable by like a screen reader or. It was just a lot of problems, the easiest way to do this was to just put in latex support which. Most educators who work with math know how to use latex so. Then we have discussions. Discussions were an interesting. Design problem. This is also something I did very early on and it was probably the most complicated thing I had ever done at that point in time. The way this works is it's essentially a forum so you put a question in, you have a minimum word count max word count, you have the AI grading prompt just like the written response but then there's also this option for required interactions and that's important because on a forum you're supposed to be interacting with other people. So the way that the discussion forums work is you're given the question, everyone else's responses are hidden from you because we had issues with students just copying other people's ideas so we got to the point where we hide the other students answers and it will tell you like hey once you're done writing press this button. and we'll show you the other answers. You won't be able to edit your response anymore but you haven't actually submitted yet because you do have to do two interactions before you can submit so it's sort of like this kind of had this like three step submission process where you have to first write your response and then you have to tell it that you're done with your response and that you want to see everyone else's and then you have to do your interactions with everyone else's. Um and then if there's a required number of interactions, uh that you haven't, if you haven't met that it will lock you out from submitting. So, and then you know if there are zero required interactions that was also important to sort of work in there. So this one was um it was a fun design challenge to figure out how do we how do we we don't want students submitting without these interactions but how do you do that How do you let them interact with other people without letting them like cheat off of other people first? So this was the the solution I came up for or came up with for that. Um let's see there are truth and true false
True false works exactly how you would think it would. There's also a date input. This is a manually graded one as well but it can be changed to zero points to just be completion-based. This is useful when you're asking students, "What date do you plan on taking this exam?" so this allows them to put a date in and have it be gradable and viewable.

There's an embed option, which allows you to embed. You could probably embed a YouTube video but you can also do that in the display item. The embed block is very useful for embedding a whiteboard from a Math app. Let's say you want to put a Khan Academy assignment embedded onto the page. The embed button allows you to do that and then that is not graded because I can't interact with what's happening in the embedded tool. It could be anything so it just isn't worth the time to make that possible if that makes sense.

Finally we have certificates. There are several courses where when you're finished with them you might want proof that you did it, especially if it's like suicide prevention training or IEP training, something you need to be able to show your administrator that you have completed the training for this. Also very common for any sort of professional development course.

What this is, is a way for us to not have to do that manually every time someone needs it done. You can give it a header and introduction text. This is the stuff that will show up on the certificate itself. Sometimes the amount of hours spent is important so that's an option. It says it is recommended that the certificate item be the only item on a page with that page in its own section and lesson. That section should be at the end of the course and it should be locked behind all other sections of the course so this is a good way to make sure that they have done everything else in the course and then they can get their certificate with no input from anyone on the Math Track team. It can be completely automated and it can sit outside of the course content if you want by turning off the lesson and section title, like I talked about earlier. Not only can you see the certificate here but if you go to your documents page, there's also a section where the certificates that you've earned will be viewable and downloadable as well so

There are few design or user experience touches included on this page that are just part of every item type. One of those is this ID button down in the bottom left corner. You can click on it to copy it and this is really helpful because there are other places in the app where you can search something by an ID, lock by that ID, or create the milestones based off of that ID.

There's also, over on the right side, versioning available. This is also one of the more complicated things I worked on early on. As a developer I really had absolutely no background info on how to do this at all. I just completely made it up and if the system works I'm pretty proud of it. I don't know if it's done in a really efficient way or not but it has worked pretty well.

It defaults to auto versioning, which means there are certain types of edits that will count as a major edit or a minor edit. You can also choose if it's a major or a minor. What happens if it's a major edit? 1.0 will become 2.0 and what that means is if a student completed this item type when it was 1.0, that is all they will ever see when they view this past assignment. They'll always see the version that they did. Any new submissions that they do will have the 2.0 version.

This was really important because we had... well, the minor version is these are things that you want to affect existing assignments so this is like typos. Mostly it's typos, small formatting changes, or clarifying a question or fixing an incorrect answer. This will become 1.1 and anyone who is on version one will see 1.1 now so they might have submitted this item already. When they go back and look at it, the type was fixed, right?

The item drawer over here on the right. Let me talk about how the database works here. Items can be reused. They can belong to multiple sections but when you, let's say, a student is in two courses and both of these courses use the same item somewhere (for example, course feedback, "Tell me about how you liked this course"), that could be a text box and that's one item and that can be used in all kinds of places. When responses and grades are saved in relation to items, they're also saved with their version number and the course that they're in so that they can have different answers for the same item between different courses. That just means our content creators don't have to create a course feedback text box 75 times.

Something else that exists is this find items box. Since items can be reused, I added the ability to search for items. If I put the word gemstone in the search box, every item that mentions gemstone will come up. It will tell you what kind of item type it is and how many pages it's used in. There's a button to add it to your assignment, the page you're working on. If you hover over it, it'll give you a little mini preview of what the settings look like for that. It also highlights the keywords you searched for so if you search just for gym, you might get some other word where gym is in the middle of it. The highlighting is nice and it was actually pretty hard to get it to search the item and only display a little bit of the text before and after the highlighted word so that would fit in this box.

When you have items that are used in multiple pages, they have this little purple link button. When viewing from this little drawer, you can hover over this and click on any of them to go see how that item looks on other pages. When you have an item that's used in multiple places on your page, it'll show up with the same link button at the top of that item. If you hover over it, you can see a list of the pages this is used on and then a button to disconnect them. This is really useful because if you edit this item while it is connected to other pages, the update will affect all of that item on every page it shows up in. It's not like a new version being saved to the page. That page is called this specific item ID. If it changes anywhere, it changes everywhere. This disconnect button allows you to create a new ID for the item. It's like a quick way to get the base of an item you've made already but you want to make some changes to it. You can pull it over, disconnect it, and then make changes.

There's similar functionality when creating courses. You can clone courses. This was one of the very first things that our content creators asked for because we have a Transition to Teaching program for Indiana, West Virginia, and Arkansas. For the most part those courses are very, very much the same with very small changes so one of the very first things that they needed was to be able to clone a course.

When you clone a course you have two ways to continue and it will give you this information box. Items can be reused in multiple courses or pages. If you want to edit an item in the new course or original course and have those changes propagate to the other, you should choose "Use Same IDs". If you want to edit the item separately, you should choose "Use New IDs". You can disconnect individual items later if you choose to use the same IDs.

When it clones the course it will either use the same exact item IDs used here or it will create a clone of every item in that course with a new ID. It's very similar to the idea of bringing in an item and seeing what it's linked to or disconnecting it. This just does it at the course level for you.
There's similar functionality when creating courses. You can clone courses. This was one of the very first things that our content creators asked for because we have a Transition to Teaching program for Indiana, West Virginia, and Arkansas. For the most part those courses are very, very much the same with very small changes so one of the very first things that they needed was to be able to clone a course.

When you clone a course you have two ways to continue and it will give you this information box. Items can be reused in multiple courses or pages. If you want to edit an item in the new course or original course and have those changes propagate to the other, you should choose "Use Same IDs". If you want to edit the item separately, you should choose "Use New IDs". You can disconnect individual items later if you choose to use the same IDs.

When it clones the course it will either use the same exact item IDs used here or it will create a clone of every item in that course with a new ID. It's very similar to the idea of bringing in an item and seeing what it's linked to or disconnecting it. This just does it at the course level for you.

The dashboard looks different depending on the program you're in, the roles that you have, and what your status is as someone who's enrolled with us. This is the place where you should be able to go and see everything you need to know.
If you're logged in as a content creator or a grader, you'll have Quick Actions, which are editing courses or a miniature view of the grading queue.
If you're an applicant and you haven't finished your application, when you log in it'll give you a big link and say, "Hey you need to finish this application."
If you've applied but haven't been accepted yet, it'll tell you, "Hey we're waiting on your transcripts. Please send these in. If you already did please wait a couple of days while we look over them and then you'll get an email and have access."
For one of our programs it's really important that students have access to their transcript. For that program their transcript is right here on the dashboard and they can see their upcoming semesters and see what courses they're pre-enrolled in. This is also where we put program maps, which is another fun thing to develop. It was sort of difficult but it's sort of automatically updated so as you add more courses, so long as they're under this section, it'll be added to this interactive map here.

Also on the dashboard you have your information and then the ability to request a change. It's important that we don't give students the ability to just change the information themselves because we have all of that information linked to things in our HubSpot and our database. We need to vet all changes that they're requesting. There's a section for MathTrack support and then there are bookmark instructions. This teaches you how to put a shortcut to the app on your phone or on your desktop. This is a single-page application and it can be installed as an app, which I believe just hides the browser box from you. You are still viewing it as a web page but it looks a little bit cleaner, I guess.
The app has changed a lot over the last few years, and there are some pretty cool or crafty features that used to exist that don't anymore. One of them was, we wanted to use this curriculum called MathSpace. But the only way to really use them in any sort of automated way with students was to connect it to an SIS. Through Clever. So, Clever is just this free, it's like a free app where you can connect your SIS and then you can connect to other apps and it will give the SIS information to the apps and sync between them for you so it's a middle man basically. We didn't have an SIS so we've started off with Mathspace of our teachers just manually putting all of the students in there and that started to just become crazy right like hundreds of students thousands of students it wasn't scalable. And then we're also relying on like there's no way for us to even get that data out of there because even if they enroll like a student manually that that students not like associated with our database at all right. There's no like ID number that they're putting in so I ended up just making my own I spent a few days researching all of the SIS solutions out there and I didn't like them and they were expensive I thought for what they did, and a lot of them had way more functionality than we even needed. So I made my own, and I mean it's essentially just a bunch of tables, right. But I was able to connect it to Clever and have courses and teachers and students sync over to MathSpace automatically which was a huge improvement in user experience for our teachers. And part of that was also like I would create fake student accounts for every teacher and fake classrooms for every teacher so that they could log in as a student. And interact with their own course to see how it works and also so that they had a place, like a course that they could play around in without messing anything up in their actual course. And so that, the emails don't actually need to be real emails. So I was able to just like append student to the end of their email and they would be able to use that to log in to Clever with the same password. So it was an easy way for them to get on there and like interact with it in like a non-destructive way. This started to get sort of confusing as we, we started to add more features to the app and we wanted our teachers and students to start logging into our app as well as Clever, as well as Mathspace. And it just, it started to become too much So I set it up in such a way where they never needed to actually go to Clever anymore. They could just go onto our app and they could navigate directly to Mathspace from there. And so long as you have like logged in one time, you stay logged in. Then there was the problem of Mathspace has all of this great great data in it that we cannot access and a lot of the apps on Clever will pull data from the app and give it to your SIS. Mathspace was not set up to do that. So I worked with the developers at Mathspace for like a custom solution because we were using their services quite a bit. So we had their solution was well, how about we give you the static link in every day. The data at the link will change with the updated data and they're essentially just JSONs with a unique identifier for each student and then all of their grades for every assignment. And this worked even though it it wasn't a secure URL. If anyone else had gotten to it they'd be able to see the data but since it wasn't connected to any anything identifiable and the ID used there is not the same ID used on our app I was able to pull it in and then like make the association between the ID there and then the ID in our app and then sync in all the grades. This is a pretty big undertaking. The files just got bigger and bigger as we had more students. They were including every single course and every single assignment in there and it was getting very bulky and kind of slow. It only updated once overnight so we got lots of complaints from teachers and students confused about where their grades are. In order to have that syncing happen in the first place at a specific time, I had to learn how to use webhooks and I used something called Chrome hooks which you can time a webhook basically. There were a whole bunch of those going on and the system just became, there were lots of steps where things could fail and even when it didn't fail it was pretty confusing. The system worked well enough for what we needed it to do for about a year and then I finally said this is not, this is not good. We need to change something. And we had decided at that point that well, what if instead of using Mathspace we just put our own math content directly into our app? So we were able to cut out Clever and Mathspace completely and then we had moved all of our content just directly into the app so that's when the app really became a content management system for real. And that was all with like K through 12 like the first year and a half of the company after that year and a half we our business changed and we were no longer working with the students in the schools anymore or even the teachers directly so the whole system for needing like the fake. Like the fake student accounts for teachers, the clever stuff, the attendance that came with that none of it was really needed anymore so basically an entirely different version of the APP has scrapped not all at once but you know it was take this out as we don't need to add this in and now you have a ship of these thing going on where this is a completely different APP than it used to be but the features are still cool to talk about.
the biggest issue I've had while developing the app has really been the database architecture. Not only did I have zero experience or teaching on how to do that, but the app has just slowly evolved so much that I mean the architecture is just... it's a lot of "I'll change this a little bit so that it works with the old stuff and the new stuff." I think if I were to do this again I would be much more modular with how I set up the database. Right now it's a little bit too strict with what kinds of things go where and how they connect to each other and there's too much data in this table. I should have separated them into smaller tables.

The biggest issue is probably that the only people really using our app at the beginning were teachers and students, like actual teachers in K through 12 schools and their students. I had a user table which had user IDs and emails and then I had a teacher table and a student table. Those had all of the demographic information for those users attached as we continue to expand and evolve. We now had programs and these programs needed the same kind of demographic data so I was like, "I don't know what to do. Do I just make a whole new table with all the same information?" I put them into the teacher's table and my teacher's table basically became my user information table. The student table just wasn't used and it was just a big mess. I didn't know about UUIDs when I first made the user table so user IDs are just four numbers, not very secure, but the teacher's table uses actual UUIDs. There's just a lot going on there, a lot of room for improvement. I don't think I would make these same mistakes again after suffering through the consequences of them and learning that way but it's definitely an area where I could learn a lot more from someone with more experience than that specifically.
